
// BRICK RESEARCH


//Materials
    Burnt Clay Brick: It is obtained by pressing the clay in molds and fried and dried in kilns. It is the most used bricks. It requires plastering when used in construction works. 
    
    Fly ash clay Brick: It is manufactured when fly ash and clay are molded in 1000 degree Celsius. It contains a high volume of calcium oxide in fly ash. That is why usually described as self-cementing. It usually expands when coming into contact with moisture. It is less porous than clay bricks. It proved a smooth surface so it doesn’t need plastering.
    
    Concrete Brick: It is made of concrete. It is the least used bricks. It has low compression strength and is of low quality. These bricks are used above and below the damp proof course. These bricks are used can be used for facades, fences and internal brickworks because of their sound reductions and heat resistance qualities. It is also called mortar brick. It can be of different colors if the pigment is added during manufacturing. It should not be used below ground. 
    
    Sand-lime Brick: Sand, fly ash and lime are mixed and molded under pressure. During wet mixing, a chemical reaction takes place to bond the mixtures. Then they are placed in the molds. The color is greyish as it offers something of an aesthetic view. It offers a smoother finish and uniform appearance than the clay bricks. As a result, it also doesn’t require plastering. It is used as a load bearing members as it is immensely strong. 
    
    Firebrick: It is also known as refractory bricks. It is manufactured from a specially designed earth. After burning, it can withstand very high temperature without affecting its shape, size, and strength. It is used for the lining of chimney and furnaces where the usual temperature is expected to be very high.


//Shapes

    Bullnose Brick: These bricks are molded into round angles. They are used for rounded quoin.
    
    Airbricks: These bricks contain holes to circulate air. They are used on suspended floors and cavity walls.
    
    Channel Bricks: They are molded into the shape of a gutter or channel. They are used in drains. 
    
    Coping Bricks: They can be half round, chamfered, Saddleback, angled varied according to the thickness of the wall.
    
    Cow Nose Bricks: Bricks having double bullnose known as Cow Nose Bricks.
    
    Capping Bricks: These bricks are used to cap the tops of parapets or freestanding walls. 
    
    Brick Veneers: These bricks are thin and used for cladding.
    
    Curved Sector Bricks: These are curved in shape. They are used in arcs, pavements, etc.
    
    Hollow Bricks: These bricks are around one-third of the weight of the normal bricks. They are also called cellular or cavity 
    bricks. Their thickness is from 20-25mm. These bricks pave the way to quicker construction as they can be laid quickly 
    compared to the normal bricks. They are used in partitioning. 
    
    Paving Bricks: These bricks contain a good amount of iron. Iron vitrifies bricks at low temperature. They are used in garden park floors, pavements. These bricks withstand the abrasive action of traffic thus making the floor less slippery. 
    
    Perforated Bricks: These bricks contain cylindrical holes. They are very light in weight. Their preparation method is also easy. They consume less clay than the other bricks. They can be of different shapes like round, square, rectangular. They are used in the construction of the panels for lightweight, structures, and multistoried frame structures. 
    
    Purpose Made Bricks: For specific purposes, these bricks are made. Splay and can’t bricks are made for doors and window jambs. Engineering bricks are made for civil engineering constructions such as sewers, manholes, retaining walls. Fire bricks are made for chimneys and fireworks. Ornamental bricks are made to use for cornices, corbels. Arch bricks are used in arcs.

//Manufacturing Method


    Extruded Brick: It is created by forcing clay and water into a steel die, with a very regular shape and size, then cutting the resulting column into shorter units with wires before firing. It is used in constructions with limited budgets. It has three or four holes constituting up to 25% volume of the brick.
    
    Molded Brick: It is shaped in molds by hand rather being in the machine. Molded bricks between 50-65mm are available instantly. Other size and shapes are available in 6-8 weeks after the order.
    
    Dry pressed Brick: It is the traditional types of bricks which are made by compressing clay into molds. It has a deep frog in one bedding surface and shallow frog in another.


//Classification based on building

	Unburnt Bricks: These are half burnt bricks. The color is yellow. The strength is low. They are used as surki in lime terracing. They are used as soiling under RCC footing or basement. Such bricks should not be exposed to rainwater.
	
	Burnt Bricks: Burnt bricks are made by burning them in the kiln. First class, Second Class, Third Class bricks are burnt bricks. 

	Over Burnt or Jhama Brick: It is often known as the vitrified brick as it is fired at high temperature and for a longer period of time than conventional bricks. As a result, the shape is distorted. The absorption capacity is high. The strength is higher or equivalent to first class bricks. It is used as lime concrete for the foundation. It is also used as coarse aggregate in the concrete of slab and beam which will not come in contact with water. 






//MORTAR

//types
Cement Mortar

Cement mortar is a type of mortar where cement is used as binding material and sand is used as fine aggregate. Depending upon the desired strength, the cement to the sand proportion of cement mortar varies from 1:2 to 1:6.
Lime Mortar

Lime mortar is a type of mortar where lime (fat lime or hydraulic lime) is used as binding material and sand is used as fine aggregate. The lime to the sand proportion of cement mortar is kept 1:2. The pyramids at Giza are plastered with lime mortar.
Gauged Mortar

Gauged mortar is a type of mortar where cement and lime both are used as binding material and sand is used as fine aggregate. Basically, it is a lime mortar where cement is added to gain higher strength. The process is known as gauging. The cement to the lime proportion varies from 1:6 to 1:9. Gauged mortar is economical than cement concrete and also possess higher strength than lime mortar.
Surki Mortar

Surki mortar is a type of mortar where lime is used as binding material and surki is used as fine aggregate. Surki mortar is economic.
Mud Mortar

Mud mortar is a type of mortar where mud is used as binding material and sawdust, rice husk or cow-dung is used as fine aggregate. Mud mortar is useful where lime or cement is not available.

  



 //SAND

 //colours

    White Sand: It’s made of eroded limestone and may contain coral and shell fragments, in addition to other organic or organically derived fragmental material is may find in this color of sand. Magnetite, Chlorite, Glauconite, or Gypsum is also found.
    
    Black Sand: Black sand is composed of volcanic minerals and lava fragments and Coral deposits. 
    
    Pink Sand: Foraminifera, a microscopic organism that has a reddish-pink shell, is responsible for all this color. Coral, shells, and calcium are also found in this mix. 
    
    Red-orange Color: This color is formed due to the coating of iron oxide. 
    
    White-grey Color: This sand consists of fine rounded grains and It is well graded.
    
    Light-brown Color: It consists of rounded grains.


Different Types of Sand

It is not possible to classify the sand. Because there is no such thing as an official sand classification. Sand is a highly variable substance and therefore it is possible to make an attempt to classify it into separate categories.

    Coral Sand: Coral sand has several meanings.
    Glass Sand: This type of sand mainly consists of silicon dioxide. and this is the main element in this type of sand.
    Immature Sand: Sand composed of the same minerals that made up its parent rocks. 
    Gypsum Sand: This type of same mainly consists of Calcium sulfate dihydrate. (CaSO4·2H2O)
    Ooid Sand: Ooids are rounded pellets, and are also spheroidal coated sedimentary grains. And this type of sand is formed by calcium carbonate.
    Silica Sand: Silica sand is almost pure quartz. 
    Pit Sand: 

    - Obtained by forming pits into the soil

    - It is sharp, angular, porous and free from harmful salts

    - Clay & other impurities should be washed and screened before using engineering purposes.

    - Fine pit sand, when rubbed between fingers, should not leave any stain on it. It indicates the presence of clay.

    -Used for the mortars
    River Sand: 

    - Found at river beds and banks.

    - Fine, round and polished due to rubbing action of water currents.

    - Has less frictional strength because of roundness.

    - Almost white in color.

    - Grains are smaller than pit sand, and hence more suitable for plastering work.

    - Normally available in pure condition and hence can be used for all kinds of Civil Engineering works.
    Sea Sand:

    - Obtained from seashores.

    - Fine, rounded, and polished due to rubbing action of water.

    - Light brown in color.

    - Worst of the three types of sand because of containing a lot of salts.

    - Salts absorb moisture from the atmosphere and cause permanent dampness and efflorescence in the structure.

    - Sea salt also retards the setting action of cement.

    - Besides, it contains shells and organic matter which decompose in the body of mortar and concrete and hence reduce their life and strength.

    - Sea sand should as far as possible be discarded
    Green Sand: Have some greenish materials. 
    Desert Sand: Which is found in the various desert. 
    Lithic Sand: Sometimes sand is composed of tiny rocks or comparatively more little, from this its formation its name is lithic sand.
    Mixed Carbonate-silicate Sand: Some sand samples are a mixture of organic and inorganic sand grains. 
    Biogenic Sand: Sand may be composed entirely of tiny skeletons — seashells, corals, forams, etc. 
    Garnet Sand: Garnet is a common mineral in the sand but sometimes it forms the majority of it. 
    Olivine Sand: This type of sand is very unstable. And it is mainly used for steel casting sectors. But, it is a common sand mineral in some area and sometimes makes up a major part of the sand.
    Volcanic Sand: Volcanically affected regions have their own type of dark-colored sand with a different type of characteristics. And sometimes coal is found in that.
    Heavy Mineral Sand: In this type of sand there are some high mass molecule is found and can make a stable structure.
    Sands with Hematitic Pigment: Hematite is the mineral that provides reddish pigment and sandstone.
    Continental Sand: This sand is a common whole over the world for the formation of various structures.
    Quartz Sand: Quartz is the same as silicon sand. Mainly quartz or silicon-dioxide is the main element to form this sand.
